Release first snapshot for 1.4.0 (#121)
mumble-voip/mumble-www: hugo/content/blog/2020-12-24-mumble-1-4-0-snapshot.md

---

> title: Mumble 1.4.0 Snapshot Announcement

Reviewer: We called them _Development Snapshot_ and _Snapshot_ before. I think the development snapshot is a very useful distinction that clarifies what it is.

We could also call it "first development snapshot" to indicate this is the start of them, and not a singular release.

author: Robert Adam
date: 2020-12-24
categories:
  - News
  - Snapshot
---

This year we have a Christmas present for you: We are proud to announce that the first **snapshot release of Mumble 1.4.0** is released as of now. It
is a very important step towards the actual release of version 1.4.0.

After having understood what it means for a release to be a _snapshot release_ (see below), you can download the new version from our [**Downloads
page**]({{< relref "/downloads" >}}).

<!--more-->

## Snapshot releases

> A _snapshot release_ can be considered an open-beta for an upcoming feature release. This means that it contains the latest and greatest features that

Reviewer 2: This should be shorter imo. People mostly don't like to read long texts.

Recommendation is:
```
Note: This is an unstable test version (release candidate), so it might have unknown bugs and it maybe does not work correctly. 
We discourage use in productive environments.

Useful Steps before use:
- Backup your configuration files etc. before use

Report any bugs you encounter to our issue tracker.
```

Author: Well we never used the term "snapshot release" before so I think a proper explanation of what this is, id due.
And if people don't want to read it, they can still skip it easily. It's not that long after all ^^

were introduced since the last feature release. This does also mean that these features have not been tested by a broad audience yet and are
therefore likely to still contain bugs. These could be minor ones, but in theory these could also be major. Therefore it is important that you always
back up your data (e.g. configuration files) if you have a previous version of Mumble installed.

Due to the reasoning stated above, we do not recommend using snapshots in an environment where stability of the software is key (e.g. in a business

> context).

Reviewer: I think we should also mention the target audience. Tech-savy people who are confident in using them.

A “normal” end-user may not be the best audience for this.

That being said though, we strongly encourage you to try snapshots out whenever possible and report any problems you encounter to our [**issue
tracker**](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/issues). This kind of feedback is very important for us to be able to make the actual release as
stable and reliable a possible.

> ## Feature spotlight

Reviewer 2: Maybe rename it: "New and improved Features"

Author: But that's not what this is. It's only about new features and it is only about a few specific features. I think the term "spotlight" describes this pretty well :thinking:

Reviewer: I agree Spotlight is a good term for that.

As there are many, many changes with this new version, here is a selection of things that we think are most prominent. If you're interested in all
changes, have a look at the full [changelog](#Changelog).

### Channel listeners

### TalkingUI

### UI indication for access restrictions

### Markdown

### Stereo playback

### Nicknames

> ## Thanks

Reviewer 2: Maybe call it "Special Thanks".

We want to thank everyone who spent some time to work on the project. Without this kind of help from you, we would not be able to provide this
software in the way that it is.

> ## Changelog

Reviewer 2: This is quite long, maybe it could be put somewhere else, so it doesn't make the blogpost too long.
Otherwise it could maybe be put in a [collapsible section](https://gist.github.com/pierrejoubert73/902cc94d79424356a8d20be2b382e1ab) ... though lists inside a collapsible section don't work in some coverters, maybe hugo is different.

Author: If Hugo can cope with collapsible sections, that'd be a good idea. Moving this to somewhere else, I don't like since we don't have space for it on our download page and we'll not have a GitHub release for this where we could put this :eyes: 

@Kissaki do you happen to know whether hugo can create collapsible sections?

Reviewer: Markdown does not support collapsible sections. But HTML can be embedded just fine. We could also introduce shortcodes for this. Both are fine solutions to me.

Noteworthy, we did use HTML with more structuring and collapsibles for the big 1.3 release notes.

So feel free to put `<details><summary>caption</summary>content</details>` into the markdown file. Or create (or ask me to create) a shortcode for it.

Author: I now made the changelog collapsible. Introducing shortcodes sounds like a good idea, even though I don't know how to do that (nor am i entirely sure of what exactly these are xD) :point_up:

- Added: Config option which allows the server to remeber a user's channel for limited time only ({{<issue 4147 >}})
- Added: Ability to load welcome message from file ({{<issue 4344 >}})
- Fixed: Use a temporary keychain on macOS in order to avoid permission issues ({{<issue 4345 >}})
- Fixed: Undefined behavior when logging SSL error ({{<issue 4452 >}})
- Improved: Also log a client's OS ({{<issue 4035 >}})
- Improved: CPU utilization by using TCP_NODELAY mode by default ({{<issue 4054 >}})
- Improved: Use zeroconf instead of Bonjour on Windows if available ({{<issue 4494 >}})

### Installer

- Improved: Chinese translations ({{<issue 3807 >}}, {{<issue 3613 >}})
- Improved: Uninstall no longer deletes murmur.ini file ({{<issue 4096 >}})
- Complete refactoring ({{<issue 4574 >}})

### Positional audio plugins

- Added: General Source Engine support ({{<issue 3771 >}})
- Added: Among Us ({{<issue 4571 >}})
- Updated: GTA V ({{<issue 4059 >}})
- Updated: Manual plugin's UI now shows a speaker's location ({{<issue 4352 >}})

### Overall

- The project has been migrated to be built with cmake instead of qmake ({{<issue 4252 >}})

> ## Known issues

Reviewer 2: This should maybe be mentioned somewhere above.

Author: Hm I don't think this is important enough to be listed before the changelog, let alone before any of the other content :thinking:

Reviewer: I think this is the correct place. The headline is on the same level as the Changelog, and follows it. This is also standard practice (elsewhere) from my experiecne.

---
title: First Mumble 1.4.0 Development Snapshot
author: Robert Adam
date: 2020-12-24
categories:
  - News
  - Development Snapshot
---

> This year we have a Christmas present for you: We are proud to announce that the first **snapshot release of Mumble 1.4.0** is released as of now. It

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This year we have a Christmas present for you: we are proud to announce that the first **snapshot release of Mumble 1.4.0** is released as of now. It
```

Author: Afaik it's correct the way it is right now :thinking:

Reviewer 3: It actually depends: https://www.grammarly.com/blog/capitalization-after-colons

Author: Guess I always did it wrong then xD

is a very important step towards the actual release of version 1.4.0.

After having understood what it means for a release to be a _snapshot release_ (see below), you can download the new version from our [**Downloads
page**]({{< relref "/downloads" >}}).

<!--more-->

## Development Snapshots

A _development snapshot_ can be considered an open-beta for an upcoming feature release. This means that it contains the latest and greatest features
that were introduced since the last feature release. Note though that in contrast to a _release candidate_ the list of features that will be included
in the final 1.4.0 release is _not_ yet frozen and is thus subject to change.

This does also mean that these features have not been tested by a broad audience yet and are therefore likely to still contain bugs. These could be
minor ones, but in theory these could also be major. Therefore it is important that you always back up your data (e.g. configuration files) if you
have a previous version of Mumble installed.

Due to the reasoning stated above, we do not recommend using snapshots in an environment where stability of the software is key (e.g. in a business
context).

> That being said though, we strongly encourage you to try snapshots out if you are a tech-savy person that can deal with potentially arising problems

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That being said though, we strongly encourage you to try snapshots out if you are a tech-savvy person that can deal with potentially arising problems
```

and report any problems you encounter to our [**issue tracker**](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/issues). This kind of feedback is very

> important for us to be able to make the actual release as stable and reliable a possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
important for us to be able to make the actual release as stable and reliable as possible.
```

changes, have a look at the full [changelog](#Changelog).

### Channel listeners

This feature can to some extent be compared to the ability to link channels. Except that this does not operate on a per-channel basis but on a
per-user basis.

Concretely this new feature allows a user to "listen to" a channel. In that case all audio that is heard by people in this particular channel (be it
by direct communication, shouts or via linked channels) is also heard by the listening user. Conceptually you could picture "listening to" a channel
with placing a microphone in a room and then listening to what is recorded.

This feature is one-way only meaning that in order to speak to people in the listened channel, you'll have to either join the channel or shout to it.

It should be noted though that you will not be secretly listened to with this new feature. Listening to a channel creates a new entry in the channel's
user-list (referred to as an "ear" or a "listener") and is thereby just as visible as a user actually being in that channel. There is also a dedicated
ACL and several new server config options that can restrict this new feature.

> Older clients (< 1.4.0) will not indicate listeners in the UI though! They are informed if this feature is enabled on a server when the join it though

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Older clients (< 1.4.0) will not indicate listeners in the UI though! They are informed if this feature is enabled on a server when they join it though
```

(via chat).

> Note: This feature requires server-side support and is thus only available on servers at least running Mumble 1.4.0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: This feature requires server-side support and is thus only available on servers that are at least 1.4.0.
```

Author: I actually prefer the original version for this one :eyes:

Reviewer 3: In the original version we refer to Mumble as protocol, which is fine.

However, it may be confusing, as the server is called Murmur.

Author: Well in that issue on GitHub we decided that we will be referring to the server as "Mumble server" :point_up: 
And actually I don't think that this really is confusing since it does mention the word "server" in the sentence anyways :thinking:

size needed to display the respective information. Thus it usually does not take up a lot of space and can therefore be left floating in the corner of
the screen without consuming too much screen real estate.

Note that the TalkingUI is highly configurable (Settings -> User Interface) and also does provides selection and context-menu support just as you get
it in the main window. In fact the selection between TalkingUI and main window is synchronized and thus this plays really nice with the new "whisper
to selected" feature allowing to whisper to whatever currently is selected in the UI (be it a channel or a user).

![TalkingUI](media/TalkingUI.png)

### UI indication for access restrictions

In previous versions of Mumble there was no indication of whether you are able to join a channel or not. You just had to try it out and either it
worked or you got a Permission Denied message. This feature solves this problem by marking "access-restricted" channels with a lock icon. Access
restricted channels are all channels that are either only open to a specific group on the server or require a password (access token) to join.

> In total a channel can be in one of three states: Either it is not access-restricted in which case it just looks like channels used to look prior to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In total a channel can be in one of three states: either it is not access-restricted in which case it just looks like channels used to look prior to
```

Author: see above

the introduction of this feature or it is indeed access-restricted. In the latter case a lock icon is shown to the right of channel name. This look
can either be open and green or closed and red. Green means that you can enter the channel nonetheless (you belong to the required group or have the
correct password (access token) set) whereas red means that you are not allowed to enter the channel.

> Note that this is also a feature that requires server-side support and thus only takes effect on servers that are at least running Mumble version
> 1.4.0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this is also a feature that requires server-side support and thus only takes effect on servers that are at least 1.4.0.
```

Author: What is this change about? removing a newline? if so: why?

Reviewer 3: I changed the wording.

Author: Ah I see. Same change as above :bulb:

![Access restricted channels](media/AccessRestrictedChannels.png)

### Markdown

For those of you who don't know what markdown is, we recommend a quick read of the respective [Wikipedia
article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown). In simple words it allows formatting of text by simply typing a few extra characters in your text.

Mumble now supports markdown for text messages written in the normal chat bar. It is not supported for cases in which you use the dedicated message

> editor. Furthermore only a subset of markdown is supported: Sections, inline-code, code-blocks, bold, italic and strike-through text, links and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
editor. Furthermore only a subset of markdown is supported: sections, inline-code, code-blocks, bold, italic and strike-through text, links and
```

Author: see above

quotes. _Not_ supported are lists and tables.

This feature is probably best explained by an example. Try pasting the following text into the chat bar and see for yourself:

````
# Markdown
## Code
We can have `inline` code and
```
code
    blocks
```

## Emphasis
**bold** and *italic* (__bold__ and _italic_ also works) text is supported. ~~Scratch that~~

## Links
We can have [links](google.de) and www.google.de

## Quotes
> I am a quote
Although these are not pretty, they do work and are supported.

## Escaping
We can escape special characters using the \\ character: \*not italic\* and \*\*not bold\*\*
````

![Markdown](media/Markdown.png)

### Stereo playback

With version 1.4.0 Mumble (finally) learned how to play back stereo audio streams. This means that it is now possible to send a stereo stream to a

> Mumble client and it will actually played back without being mixed down to a mono stream.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mumble client and it will actually be played back without being mixed down to a mono stream.
```

> Note however that this feature currently is restricted to playback. The official Mumble client will still continue sending audio as mono. This feature

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note however that this feature is currently restricted to playback. The official Mumble client will still continue sending audio as mono. This feature
```

is primarily intended to be made use of by (music) bots.

If you want to try this feature out yourself, you can either write a bot using [pymumble](https://github.com/azlux/pymumble) version 1.2 or later or
you can simply use a recent version of [botamusqiue](https://github.com/azlux/botamusique).

### Nicknames

For those of you who are annoyed by people using excessively long or complicated names or people changing their nickname frequently, Mumble 1.4.0
introduces the possibility to set a nickname for every client.

> Depending on your configuration, a nickname will either be displayed next to a user's name or in fact replace that user's name entirely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on your configuration, a nickname will either be displayed next to a user's name or replace it entirely.
```

The nickname will persist across restarts of client and server. In fact it'll last until you either remove it again or the person the nickname was
assigned to changes their client-certificate (Mumble's way of keeping track of a user's identity).

Note that nicknames are _not_ tied to a particular server. That means that if you assign a nickname to a user on server A and then you meet that

> person again on server B, they will still have that very same nickname set on Server B.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
person again on server B, they will still have that very same nickname set on server B.
```

![Nicknames](media/Nicknames.png)

> ## Special Thanks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Special thanks
```

> We want to thank everyone who spent some time to work on the project. Without this kind of help from you, we would not be able to provide this
> software in the way that it is.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We want to thank everyone who spent time on the project. Without this kind of help from you, we would not be able to provide the software the way it is.
```

- Added: Ability to load welcome message from file ({{<issue 4344 >}})
- Fixed: Use a temporary keychain on macOS in order to avoid permission issues ({{<issue 4345 >}})
- Fixed: Undefined behavior when logging SSL error ({{<issue 4452 >}})
- Improved: Also log a client's OS ({{<issue 4035 >}})
- Improved: CPU utilization by using TCP_NODELAY mode by default ({{<issue 4054 >}})
- Improved: Use zeroconf instead of Bonjour on Windows if available ({{<issue 4494 >}})

### Installer

- Improved: Chinese translations ({{<issue 3807 >}}, {{<issue 3613 >}})
- Improved: Uninstall no longer deletes murmur.ini file ({{<issue 4096 >}})
- Complete refactoring ({{<issue 4574 >}})

### Positional audio plugins

- Added: General Source Engine support ({{<issue 3771 >}})
- Added: Among Us ({{<issue 4571 >}})
- Updated: GTA V ({{<issue 4059 >}})
- Updated: Manual plugin's UI now shows a speaker's location ({{<issue 4352 >}})

### Overall

- The project has been migrated to be built with cmake instead of qmake ({{<issue 4252 >}})

</details>

## Known issues

- Overlay blocked by BattleEye. A request to whitelist it has been made.

> - Overlay blocked by CS:GO Trusted Mode

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Overlay blocked by CS:GO Trusted Mode.
```

Author: It's not a sentence, so I don't see a need for the period :thinking:

Reviewer 3: It's just for consistency with the sentence above.

Author: Well the _sentence_ above is actually a sentence. Thus the period :shrug:
